---
layout: default
title: Policies
---

<a name="electronics"></a>

# No Electronics

You cannot use electronics of any kind in class. (i.e., no laptops, cell phones,
tablets, Google Glasses, Apple Watches, etc.)

<a name="accomadations"></a>

# Accomadations

{% comment %}
From Tim Richards' 187
{% endcomment %}

If you require any special services or accommodations during this course please
make sure you register with Disability Services **within the first two weeks**
of this course. This will give us time to plan accordingly to ensure that you
get the help you need before it is too late. If you contact us after the two
weeks we may not be able to provide you the help you need.

<a name="honesty"></a>

# Honesty Policy

{% comment %}
Adapted and tweaked from Emery Berger's course.

http://people.cs.umass.edu/~emery/plasma/emery/software-systems-cmpsci-291SP.html

{% endcomment %}

**All projects in this course are to be done by you and you alone.** Violation
will result in an immediate F grade and possible initiation of the formal
procedures of the University. We use an automated program and manual checks to
correlate projects with each other and with prior solutions. **If you cheat, we
will catch you.*

At the same time, we encourage students to help each other learn the course
material. As in most courses, there is a boundary separating these two
situations. You may give or receive help on any of the concepts covered in
lecture or discussion and on the specifics of programming language syntax. You
are allowed to consult with other students in the current class to help you
understand the project specification (i.e., the problem definition). However,
you may not collaborate in any way when constructing your solution: the solution
to the project must be generated by you working alone. You are not allowed to
work out the programming details of the problems with anyone or to collaborate
to the extent that your programs are identifiably similar. You are not allowed
to look at or in any way derive advantage from the existence of project
specifications or solutions prepared elsewhere.

If you have any questions as to what constitutes unacceptable collaboration,
please talk to the instructor right away. You are expected to exercise
reasonable precautions in protecting your own work. Don't let other students
borrow your account or computer, don't leave your program in a publicly
accessible directory, and take care when discarding printouts.

In addition, you are subject to the university's [academic honesting policy]
and [guidelines for classroom civility]. You must read both of these.

<a name="questions"></a>

# Asking Questions

{% comment %}
From Tim's 187 and some adaptation
{% endcomment %}

## During Office Hours

The course staff have scheduled office hours. They tend to get busy so use
them wisely. As a general rule, we will restrict office hour visits to
at most 20 minutes. This will (1) help us serve more students and (2) help
you focus your visit.

Come to office hours *prepared* with specific questions or examples. Do not
expect to sit in office hours and fix an assignment in front of us while we
answer your questions - this means you can't code in front of us unless we
explicitly ask you to do so.

Most questions will get answered faster online than in person.

## Online

Use Piazza for **all online questions**. You can use Piazza to message the
entire class, just the course staff, or even individual staff members.

- We encourage you to post *technical questions* about the reading and homework
  publicly. This will allow both instructors and other students to respond and
  everyone will get to see the answer.

  You can post anonymously if you wish, though instructors will be able to see
  who you are. If you don't want the class to see your question at all, send it
  to *Instructors*. This is to encourage you to ask "dumb questions". (But,
  trust us: there are no dumb questions and many of your peers will have the
  same question and be grateful that you asked.)

- Send administrative questions to *Instructors* on Piazza, which includes the
  instructors, graders, and TAs. You'll get a faster response if all course
  staff can read your question.

- If you want to discuss a sensitive matter, use Piazza to contact the
  instructors directly.

Please do not send email. We will respond with "resend to Piazza".

<a name="grading"></a>

# Your Grades

Several factors determine your grade in this course. They are weighted
approximately as follows:

<div class="row">
  <div class="col-sm-3">
    <table class="table table-striped">
    <tbody>
    <tr><td>Programming Assignments</td><td>70%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Quizzes</td><td>15%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Participation (online and in-person)</td><td>5%</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Exams</td><td>10%</td></tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>
  </div>
</div>

The exact grading scheme may be adjusted during the course. However, a typical
breakdown of percentages and final grades for this course are A (93-100), A-
(90-92), B+ (87-89), B (83-86), B- (80-82), C+ (77-79), C (73-76), C- (70-72),
D+ (67-69), D (60-66), F (0-59).

Your current grades are always available on [Moodle]. You must track your own
performance throughout the class.

<a name="late"></a>

# Late Homework

You have four late days to use for any sort of emergency or party. Please
do not tell us you're submitting things late. We know how to program
computers to track this for us.

After that, the following policy applies: **you lose 10% of your grade on an
assignment for every 24 hours that an assignment is late**. This has two
consequences:

1. You get 0 points after 10 days.

2. There is no point staying up late at night after the assignment is due.
   If you realize you're going to be late, go to sleep, come to class in the
   morning, and finish the assignment after class.

<a name="attendance"></a>

# Attendance

There is no guarantee that the assigned reading will cover everything discussed
in class. Conversely, the reading may go into great depth on material the
instructor thinks is unimportant. Therefore, attend class to find out what
actually matters!

You have to complete and hand-in work in most discussion sections. Think of
this as your "attendance grade".





[academic honestly policy]: http://www.umass.edu/dean_students/codeofconduct/acadhonesty/

[guidelines for classroom civility]: http://www.umass.edu/dean_students/codeofconduct/classroomcivility/

[Moodle]: http://moodle.umass.edu